Cross-modal Retrieval with Correspondence Autoencoder

Fangxiang Feng Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing, China f.fangxiang@gmail.com

Xiaojie Wang Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing, China xjwang@bupt.edu.cn

Ruifan Li Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing, China rﬂi@bupt.edu.cn

ABSTRACT

The problem of cross-modal retrieval, e.g., using a text query to search for images and vice-versa, is considered in this pa- per. A novel model involving correspondence autoencoder (Corr-AE) is proposed here for solving this problem. The model is constructed by correlating hidden representation- s of two uni-modal autoencoders. A novel optimal objec- tive, which minimizes a linear combination of representation learning errors for each modality and correlation learning er- ror between hidden representations of two modalities, is used to train the model as a whole. Minimization of correlation learning error forces the model to learn hidden representa- tions with only common information in diﬀerent modalities, while minimization of representation learning error makes hidden representations are good enough to reconstruct in- put of each modality. A parameter α is used to balance the representation learning error and the correlation learn- ing error. Based on two diﬀerent multi-modal autoencoders, Corr-AE is extended to other two correspondence models, here we called Corr-Cross-AE and Corr-Full-AE. The pro- posed models are evaluated on three publicly available data sets from real scenes. We demonstrate that the three cor- respondence autoencoders perform signiﬁcantly better than three canonical correlation analysis based models and two popular multi-modal deep models on cross-modal retrieval tasks.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval Models; I.2.6 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Learning

General Terms

Algorithms; Design

Keywords

Cross-modal; retrieval; image and text; deep learning; au- toencoder

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita- tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re- publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. MM’14, November 03–07, 2014, Orlando, FL, USA. Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3063-3/14/11 ...$15.00. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2647868.2654902.

1. INTRODUCTION The inclusion of multi-modal data in webpages has be- come a widespread trend. For example, a webpage telling a story often contains some illustrations and other images accompanying the text. A travel photo shared on the web is usually tagged with words. The presence of massive multi- modal data on the Internet brings huge cross-modal retrieval requirements, such as using an image query to search for texts and using a text query to search for images. Unlike traditional information retrieval tasks in a single modality, such as using a text query to search for text, cross-modal re- trieval focuses on mining the correlations between data from diﬀerent modalities.

1.1 Previous Work Many approaches have been proposed to develop solutions to these challenging tasks. There are two main strategies for modeling cross-modal correlations among previous work. One strategy involves modeling the correlation between diﬀerent modalities with a shared layer. A portion of them use topic models to achieve it. Cor- respondence LDA (Corr-LDA) [4] extended LDA [5] to ﬁnd the topic-level relationships between images and text anno- tations, where topics’ distributions act as middle layer for both images and texts. For images with loosely-coupled text, a mixture of directed and undirected probabilistic graphical model, called MDRF, was proposed in [14]. This model was built using a Markov random ﬁeld over LDA. These LDA- based models essentially can be understood as a two-layer architecture with only one hidden layer. Recently, there has been a trend of developing deep ar- chitecture for tackling complex AI problems [2], which is inspired by the architectural depth of the brain. Some rep- resentative models, such as deep autoencoders (DAE) [11], deep belief networks (DBN) [13], and deep Boltzmann Ma- chine (DBM) [21], and their corresponding learning algo- rithms have been proposed. These models also have been extended to model multi-modal data. Ngiam et al. [17] used multimodal DAE to learn a shared representation for both speech and visual inputs. Srivastava and Salakhutdinov [25] used multimodal DBM and DBN to learn a uniﬁed represen- tation for both images and texts. We also noticed several deep learning methods [29, 9, 23] for learning a joint em- bedding space of image and text very recently. Those mod- els have shown signiﬁcant advantages at image annotation, objective classiﬁcation and zero-shot learning tasks. But, to our best knowledge, neither of them has been used for cross-modal retrieval up to now.

     

Figure 1: An image and its tags. “sky” and “blue” are common information in both image and text modalities. “nikon” and “nikkor” are tex- t modality-speciﬁc information while “ﬂowers” and “clouds” are image modality-speciﬁc information. Common information are the key to cross-modal re- trieval tasks.

The other strategy involves a two-stage framework. It ﬁrst learns or extracts features for each modality separately then uses canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [10] to build a lower-dimensional common representation space. This choice is more straightforward for cross-modal retrieval task. CCA is a method of data analysis used to discover a subspace of multiple data spaces. Given the training pairs p and q, CCA ﬁnds matrices U and V such that Up and V q have maximum correlations. The ﬁrst d canonical components of U and V could be used for projecting new input pairs in- to a d-dimension space where cross-modal retrieval could be conducted by calculating a simple similarity measurement, such as Euclidean or cosine distance. Rasiwasia et al. [19] proposed correlation matching mapping the features of im- ages and texts extracted by LDA into same representation space using CCA. Ngiam et al. [17] used DAE to extract features and suggested using CCA to form a shared repre- sentation of audio and video data. As in Ngiam et al.’s work, Kim et al. [15] learned the shared semantic space of diﬀerent language with DAE and CCA.

1.2 Motivation In the ﬁrst strategy, the shared layer was built by jointly learning from diﬀerent modalities. We think the shared lay- er learnt in this way might no ﬁt the need of cross-modal retrieval. Perceived data from diﬀerent modalities for a same object normally comprise of common information in all modalities and modality-speciﬁc information. Figure 1 gives an example. There is a picture accompanying with several text tags in ﬁgure 1, where “sky” and “blue” are common information in both image and text modalities. “nikon” and “nikkor” are text modality-speciﬁc information which can hardly be acquired from the image. While “ﬂow- ers” and “clouds” are only image modality-speciﬁc informa- tion which can not be captured in text tags. Intuitive- ly, common information like “sky” and “blue” are key to cross-modal retrieval. Both text modality-speciﬁc and im- age modality-speciﬁc information are not necessary and even

harmful to cross-modal retrieval. A shared representation learns both common and modality-speciﬁc information. Al- though it showed its strength on learning complementarity of data from diﬀerent modalities, it is therefore not a ex- actly well-ﬁtting representation for cross-modal retrieval. A representation which can learn only common information for diﬀerent modalities is a better choice. This is the ﬁrst mo- tivation to build our model in this paper. The second strategy separates correlation learning from representation learning. This strategy is too weak to exploit the complex correlations of representations from diﬀerent modalities, especially when autoencoders are used to learn representations. Autoencoders can be used learn diﬀerent level representation for inputs with diﬀerent reconstruction errors, one problem for building correlations between data from two diﬀerent modalities is that it is diﬃcult to de- cide which level is best for building correlations. In other words, two diﬀerent modalities may be correlated at diﬀer- ent abstract levels of representation. Therefore, correlation learning need be considered with representation learning as a whole. This is the second motivation to build our model in this paper.

1.3 Contribution In this paper, we propose correspondence autoencoder (Corr-AE) based on two basic uni-modal autoencoders. The diﬀerence between two-stage methods and our Corr-AE is illustrated in Figure 2. The two-stage methods ignore the correlation between diﬀerent modalities when perform rep- resentation learning. Corr-AE incorporates representation learning and correlation learning into a single process. A novel loss function is here designed. It includes not only the loss of diﬀerent autoencoders for all modalities, but al- so the loss of correlation between diﬀerent modalities. This model is evaluated using three publicly available data sets. Compared against several multi-modal deep learning model- s, our Corr-AE demonstrate its eﬀectiveness. Besides, based on two other multi-modal autoencoders, we extend Corr-AE to two correspondence models, Corr-Cross-AE and Corr- Full-AE. Experimental results show that based on diﬀeren- t autoencoders, the combination of representation learning and correlation learning is more eﬀective than the two-stage methods. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the details of the basic Corr-AE are described. The Corr-AE are then extended to Corr-Cross-AE and a combinational model. Section 3 describes the experimental results and compares the performance of diﬀerent models. Conclusions are presented in Section 4.

2. LEARNING ARCHITECTURE In this section, the details of the architecture of the basic Corr-AE are described. Then a loss function suitable for training Corr-AE for learning similar representations of dif- ferent modalities is proposed. Next, two extensions of the Corr-AE are introduced. Lastly, the deep architecture with the training algorithms is described.

2.1 Correspondence Autoencoder As illustrated in Figure 3, the Corr-AE architecture con- sists of two subnetworks, each a basic autoencoder. These two networks are connected by a predeﬁned similarity mea- sure on the code layer. Each subnetwork in the Corr-AE is

military soldier gun guns weapons

nature flowers pink cactus

flower pink excellence blossoms

food fish rice food rice

Image and text autoencoder

Correspondence autoencoder

First stage Second stage

Figure 2: Diﬀerence between two-stage methods and our Corr-AE: Corr-AE incorporates representation learning and correlation learning into a single process while two-stage methods separate the two processes.

Text Reconstruction Image Reconstruction

Image Representation Text Representation

Code layer

Figure 3: Correspondence autoencoder

responsible for each modality. In this way, the inputs to each subnetwork are features from one modality. During learning, the two subnetworks are coupled at their code layer using a similarity measure. After learning, the two subnetworks in the Corr-AE exhibit diﬀerent parameters even if they have the same architecture. As a result, the code for new inputs can be obtained using the learned network parameters. Formally, the mapping from the inputs of these two sub- networks to the code layers is denoted as f(p; Wf) and g(q; Wg), in which, f is image modality and g is text modality; W de- notes the weight parameters in these two subnetworks. The subscripts denote the corresponding modalities. f and g are logistic activation function. The similarity measure between ith pair of image representation p(i) and the given text rep- resentation q(i) are here deﬁned as follows:

C(p(i), q(i); Wf, Wg) = f(p(i); Wf) −g(q(i); Wg)  2

where ∥·∥2 is the L2 norm.

To learn the similar representations of these two modali- ties for one object, a loss function given input image repre- sentation p(i) and its text representation q(i) are established. To simplify the notation, the network parameters Wf, Wg are grouped as Θ. The loss function on any pair of inputs can then be deﬁned as follows:

L(p(i), q(i); Θ) =(1 −α)  LI(p(i); Θ) + LT (q(i); Θ) 

+ αLC(p(i), q(i); Θ) (2)

LI(p(i), q(i); Θ) = p(i) −ˆp(i) I  2

2 (3a)

LT (p(i), q(i); Θ) = q(i) −ˆq(i) T  2

2 (3b)

LC(p(i), q(i); Θ) = C(p(i), q(i); Θ) (3c)

Here, ∥·∥2 is the L2 norm. LI and LT are the losses caused by data reconstruction errors for the given inputs (an image and its text) of two subnetworks, speciﬁcally image and text modalities. ˆp(i) I and ˆq(i) I are the reconstruction data from p(i) and q(i) respectively; LC is the correlation loss; α(0 < α < 1) in the total loss function (2) is a parameter used to trade oﬀbetween two groups of objectives: correlation losses and reconstruction losses. An appropriate value for α is crucial. If α = 0, the loss function degenerates to the loss function of the autoencoders. It cannot then capture any correlations between inputs from diﬀerent modalities. At the other extreme, considering only correlation loss, α is set to 1. This assumes that any pair of inputs has correlations, regardless of whether the image and text inputs match or not. An intuitive interpretation for this is that the cost function only focuses on the constraints of correlations and ignores the characteristics of the data completely.

Image Reconstruction Text Reconstruction

Image Representation Text Representation

Code layer

Figure 4: Correspondence cross-modal autoencoder

Image Reconstruction Text Reconstruction

Image Representation Text Representation

Code layer

Text Reconstruction Image Reconstruction

Figure 5: Correspondence full-modal autoencoder

In summary, minimizing the loss function deﬁned in E- q. (2) enables our Corr-AE to learn similar representations from bimodal feature representations.

2.2 Correspondence Cross-modal Autoencoder As illustrated in Figure 4, we propose the Corr-Cross-AE, which replace the basic autoencoders to cross-modal autoen- coders. Unlike the basic autoencoders, which reconstruct the input itself, cross-modal autoencoders reconstruct input from diﬀerent modalities. The loss function on any pair of inputs of the Corr-Cross-AE is deﬁned as follows:

L(p(i), q(i); Θ) =(1 −α)  LI(p(i), q(i); Θ) + LT (p(i), q(i); Θ) 

+ αLC(p(i), q(i); Θ) (4)

LI(p(i), q(i); Θ) = q(i) −ˆq(i) I  2

2 (5a)

LT (p(i), q(i); Θ) = p(i) −ˆp(i) T  2

2 (5b)

LC(p(i), q(i); Θ) = C(p(i), q(i); Θ) (5c)

Here, ˆq(i) I and ˆp(i) T are the reconstruction data from im- age and text subnet, respectively. The meanings of other symbols are the same as in Eq. (2). The representation learning of image modality in cross- modal autoencoder considers the information from the text modality and vice-versa. This causes some correlations to be captured in the reconstruction loss.

2.3 Correspondence Full-modal Autoencoder The full-modal autoencoder can be viewed as a combina- tion of a basic autoencoder and cross-modal autoencoder. This autoencoder is proposed to model the audio and video

First Component Gaussian RBM Replicated Softmax RBM

Image Input Text Input

RBM RBM

Code layer

Third Component

Second Component

Figure 6: Deep architecture

data in [17]. The basic Corr-AE are also easy to extend to Corr-Full-AE based on full-modal autoencoder. As illus- trated in Figure 5, the autoencoder reconstruct not only the input itself but also input from diﬀerent modalities. This “full” representation space contains information from both modalities. The loss function of any pair of inputs of the Corr-Full-AE is deﬁned as follows:

L(p(i), q(i); Θ) =(1 −α)  LI(p(i), q(i); Θ) + LT (p(i), q(i); Θ) 

+ αLC(p(i), q(i); Θ) (6)

LI(p(i), q(i); Θ) = p(i) −ˆp(i) I  2

2 + q(i) −ˆq(i) I  2

2 (7a)

LT (p(i), q(i); Θ) = p(i) −ˆp(i) T  2

2 + q(i) −ˆq(i) T  2

2 (7b)

LC(p(i), q(i); Θ) = C(p(i), q(i); Θ) (7c)

Here, ˆp(i) I and ˆq(i) I are the reconstruction data from p(i)

and q(i) in the image subnet; ˆp(i) T and ˆq(i) T are the recon- struction data from p(i) and q(i) in the text subnet. The meanings of other symbols are the same as in Eq. (2).

2.4 Deep Architecture Data from diﬀerent modalities may have very diﬀerent statistical properties. This makes it diﬃcult to capture cor- relations across modalities directly. To address this, a deep architecture is here proposed. This ﬁrst involves using some stacked modality-friendly models to learn higher-level rep- resentations that remove such modality-speciﬁc properties. Then the Corr-AE are used to learn similar representations at a higher level. As illustrated in Figure 6, the deep architecture has three stacked components. The ﬁrst two components are all re- stricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs). There are two ex- tended RBMs for the ﬁrst component and two basic RBMs for the second component. To be brief, RBM[22] is an undi- rected graphical model with stochastic binary units in a vis-

ible layer and hidden layer but without connections between the units within these two layers. Given that each unit is distributed by Bernoulli distribution with logistic activation function, a joint probabilistic distribution of visible units and hidden units can be deﬁned. The basic RBM can be extended to exponential family. All the models can be eﬃ- ciently learned by using the contrastive divergence approx- imation (CD) [12]. For the ﬁrst layer, Gaussian RBM [28] and replicated softmax RBM [20] can be used to model the real-valued feature vectors for image and the discrete sparse word count vectors for text, respectively. After learning the RBMs, the hidden layer can then be used as the input for the second component. The second component involves two basic RBMs, which are used to learn higher-level features for image and text. The third component can involve any one of the three correspondence autoencoders given above. The learning for Corr-AE can be performed using standard back-propagation algorithm. Because diﬀerent modalities are mapped into the same representation space by the deep architecture, it is straight- forward to use the model for cross-modal retrieval tasks. For example, given a text query, we expect the relevant images could be returned1. After learning this deep architecture, all test images are mapped into the representation space from the three-layer image subnetwork. A new text query is mapped into the same space from the three-layer text subnetwork. The similarity between the text query and all the candidate images can be calculated by a simple distance metric in the representation space. In this way, in search- ing for image using text, image ranked list will return by increasing distance for any text query.

3. EXPERIMENTS We evaluate our models on three public available real- world data sets. In this section, we ﬁrst give a detailed de- scription of these data sets. Then, the evaluation protocol used in the experiments is introduced. Next, the perfor- mance of several models is reported. Finally, an analysis of the impact of α on the models is given.

3.1 Data sets and Feature Extraction Wikipedia. The data set [19] was collected from ”Wikipedi- a featured articles”. It contains 2,866 image/text pairs be- longing to 10 semantic categories. The data set was split into three subsets: 2,173 cases as training set, 231 cases as validation set and 462 cases as testing set. For image repre- sentation, we extract the following three types of features:

• Pyramid Histogram of Words (PHOW) [6]. For PHOW features, dense SIFT descriptors is ﬁrst extracted by VLfeat [27] from per training image and then a 1000- dimensional visual word codebook learned with K-means clustering.

• Gist [18]. The gist descriptor is extracted by the pub- lic available package2 with default parameters. This results in a 512-dimensional feature vector.

• MPEG-7 descriptors [16]. We use the public available software [1] to extract four diﬀerent visual descriptors

1Text retrieval using an image query can be done in a similar way. 2http://people.csail.mit.edu/torralba/code/ spatialenvelope/

(CSD, SCD, CLD, EHD) deﬁned in MPEG-7 for image representations. The dimension of obtained MPEG-7 feature vector is 784.

Thus, each image is represented by a 2296-dimensional fea- ture vector. For text representation, we use bag of words model. A dictionary of 3000 high-frequency words is built from all training texts. We use Python Natural Language Toolkit [3] to stem the text. This data set is available at http://www.svcl.ucsd.edu/projects/crossmodal/. Pascal. The data set [8] contains 1,000 image/text pairs from 20 categories, 50 cases per categories. The images are randomly selected from 2008 PASCAL development kit. Each image is labeled with 5 sentences. We split the data into three subsets, 800 for training (40 cases per category), 100 for validation (5 cases per category) and 100 for testing (5 cases per category). The feature extraction for images and texts is the same as for the Wikipedia data set except that the dimension of text is 1,000. This data set is available at http://vision.cs.uiuc.edu/pascal-sentences/. NUS-WIDE-10k. This data set is a subset of NUS- WIDE [7], which contains about 270k images with tag an- notations from 81 categories. We only choose 10 categories with the largest quantity and 1,000 image/text pairs per category from NUS-WIDE. Each pair of our NUS-WIDE- 10k only belongs to a single category. The 10 categories are animal, clouds, ﬂowers, food, grass, person, sky, toy, water and window. We randomly split the data set into three sub- sets: 8,000 cases for training (800 cases per category), 1,000 for validation (100 cases per category) and 1,000 for test- ing (100 cases per category). Each image is represented by six descriptors, including 64-D color histogram, 144-D color correlogram, 73-D edge direction histogram, 128-D wavelet texture, 225-D block-wise color moments and 500-D bag of words based on SIFT descriptions. Each text is represented by 1000-dimensional bag of words. This data set with ex- tracted features is available at http://lms.comp.nus.edu. sg/research/NUS-WIDE.htm. As we can see, these data sets have very distinct proper- ties. For example, the text modality of the three data sets Wikipedia, Pascal and NUS-WIDE-10k is quite diﬀerent, which are article, sentences and tags, respectively. Besides, the sizes of these data sets range from 1k to 10k and the number of the categories range from 10 to 20.

3.2 Evaluation metric We consider two cross-modal retrieval tasks: text retrieval from an image query, and image retrieval from a text query. Following [30], retrieval performance is evaluated using t- wo metrics, mean average precision (mAP) and top 20% percentage. The ﬁrst one represents the ability of learning discriminative cross-modal mapping functions while the lat- er one reveals the ability of learning corresponding latent concepts. mAP Given one query and ﬁrst R top-ranked retrieved data, the average precision is deﬁned as

r=1 p(r) · rel(r) (8)

where M is the number of relevant data in the retrieved result, p(r) is precision of at r, and rel(r) presents the rel- evance of a given rank (one if relevant and zero otherwise). The retrieved data is considered as relevant if it has the same

semantic label as the query. mAP is obtained by averaging AP of all the queries. We report mAP@50 (R = 50) in all experiments. Semantic labels are only used for evaluation. Training of our models does not need any semantic label. Top 20% Jia et al. [14] proposed this evaluation metric for data sets without semantic label. Because there is on- ly one ground-truth for each image-text pair in this case, the position of the ground-truth image/text in the ranked list is used to evaluate performance. Speciﬁcally, top 20% percentage is the relative number of images/texts correctly retrieved in the ﬁrst 20% of the ranked list.

3.3 Baseline For a fair comparison, the inputs to our models and base- line methods3 are all features learned by ﬁrst two compo- nents of deep architecture described in section 2.4. That means that the only diﬀerence is the third component of the deep architecture. Besides, cosine distance is used to measure the similarity in all experiments. We compare our models with three CCA based models and two multi-modal models:

• CCA-AE[15]. We ﬁrst use two uni-modal autoencoders to learn higher level image feature and text feature respectively, and then use CCA4 to learn a common representation space on the learned features.

• CCA-Cross-AE. Instead of using the uni-modal au- toencoders with CCA, this method combines imme- diately cross-modal autoencoders and CCA.

• CCA-Full-AE. Literally, this method combines full- modal autoencoders and CCA.

• Bimodal AE[17]. We train a bimodal autoencoder to perform shared representation learning. Follow the training algorithm described in [17], we add training examples that have zero values for one of the input modalities (e.g., image) and original values for the oth- er input modality (e.g., text), but still require the net- work to reconstruct both modalities (image and text). Thus, one-third of the training data has only image for input, while another one-third of the data has only text, and the last one-third of the data has both image and text. After learning the bimodal autoencoder, a single modality input(image or text) can be mapped into the shared representation space.

• Bimodal DBN[17, 24]. A bimodal DBN is obtained by connecting image and text features with a joint layer. The model does not give a direct matching function of image and text input. However, it can generate the unknown modality conditioned on a given modality. In other words, queries can be mapped into the feature space of the other modality and a suitable similarity measure can be used to retrieve results that are close to the query.

3.4 Model Architecture We perform grid search for the number of hidden units of each layer with the setting 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024. In

3The code for all baseline models are available online at https://github.com/nitishsrivastava/deepnet. 4Matlab code of the CCA can be downloaded at http:// www.davidroihardoon.com/Professional/Code.html.

all models, to reduce the search space, the number of units for all hidden layers in the deep architecture is restricted to the same. The validation sets are used to determine the best number of hidden units. The dimensionality of the CCA latent space and the iterations of Bimodal AEs and our three correspondence models are also determined by the validation sets. For our three correspondence models, we need to choose an appropriate value for the parameter α. The parameter α is not sensitive to data sets. So, in all data sets, the value of α for Corr-AE and Corr-Full-AE is set to 0.8. For Corr-Cross-AE, α is set to 0.2. A detailed analysis of α will be given at the end of this section. For the models involving CCA, to achieve a better per- formance, CCA is applied to learn the correlation between the image and text hidden layers with diﬀerent number of units. Three copies of all training data are used in Bimodal AE training. The ﬁrst copy remains data from both modal- ities (original data). The second is only image data with text data setting to zeros. And the third is only text data with image data setting to all zeros. We do not weight the reconstruction errors from diﬀerent modalities. So do our correspondence models. For the Bimodal DBN, variational mean ﬁeld with ten steps is used to generate the unknown modality conditioned on a given modality. Gibbs sampling does not show improvement in our experiments. The code with parameter speciﬁcations of our three models and the baseline methods are available online5.

3.5 Results Table 1 summarizes the mAP scores and top 20% of the two cross-modal retrieval tasks for Wikipedia, Pascal and NUS-WIDE-10k data sets respectively. On all data sets, our three correspondence autoencoders signiﬁcantly outper- form other models on both tasks of text and image retrieval. Taking Corr-Full-AE as an example, we compare it with the best results on each task achieved by the ﬁve baseline mod- els. It improves mAP scores 12.3% and 16.6% respectively on searching texts by images and searching images by texts on Wikipedia data set, improves 12.4% and 2.2% respec- tively on the two tasks on Pascal data set, improves 32.4% and 10.2% respectively on the two tasks on NUS-WIDE-10k data set. Compared with CCA-AE, our Corr-AE improves average mAP value of two tasks 53.6%, 81.5%, 48.3% on Wikipedia, Pascal, NUS-WIDE-10k data sets respectively. Compared with CCA-Cross-AE, our Corr-Cross-AE improves 57.9%, 73.6%, 28.3% on the three data sets. Compared with CCA- Full-AE, our Corr-Full-AE improves 12.8%, 71.2%, 46.7% on the three data sets. Based on three diﬀerent multi-modal autoencoders, our correspondence models signiﬁcantly out- perform the two-stage methods. The advantage of our corre- spondence models over two-stage models is that correspon- dence models combined representation learning and correla- tion learning into a whole. In other words, compared with our correspondence models, the two-stage methods are sub- optimal. It is also noticeable that the diﬀerence within the three correspondence autoencoders are found to be smaller than the diﬀerence among the three CCA-AEs. This also demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of the combination of repre- sentation learning and correlation learning processes. Compared with Bimodal AE, our Corr-AE improves mAP scores 15.6% and 10.4% respectively on searching texts by

Table 1: Results of two retrieval protocols: mAP scores and top 20% on three data sets. (a) Wikipedia

Model mAP Top 20% Image Query Text Query Average Image Query Text Query Average CCA-AE[15] 0.213 0.235 0.224 28.35 23.59 25.97 CCA-Cross-AE 0.197 0.230 0.214 25.54 28.14 26.84 CCA-Full-AE 0.293 0.331 0.312 51.08 49.57 50.33 Bimodal AE[17] 0.282 0.327 0.305 44.16 42.42 43.29 Bimodal DBN[17, 24] 0.189 0.222 0.206 26.19 31.6 28.90 Corr-AE 0.326 0.361 0.344 56.06 55.19 55.63 Corr-Cross-AE 0.336 0.341 0.338 55.41 58.66 57.04 Corr-Full-AE 0.335 0.368 0.352 57.36 57.79 57.58

(b) Pascal

Model mAP Top 20% Image Query Text Query Average Image Query Text Query Average CCA-AE[15] 0.161 0.153 0.157 36 30 33 CCA-Cross-AE 0.137 0.182 0.159 18 16 17 CCA-Full-AE 0.148 0.177 0.163 32 35 33.5 Bimodal AE[17] 0.250 0.270 0.260 68 68 68 Bimodal DBN[17, 24] 0.219 0.219 0.219 55 61 58 Corr-AE 0.290 0.279 0.285 72 67 69.5 Corr-Cross-AE 0.271 0.280 0.276 78 75 76.5 Corr-Full-AE 0.281 0.276 0.279 74 73 73.5

(c) NUS-WIDE-10k

Model mAP Top 20% Image Query Text Query Average Image Query Text Query Average CCA-AE[15] 0.199 0.268 0.234 37 33.8 35.4 CCA-Cross-AE 0.199 0.344 0.272 29 47.7 38.35 CCA-Full-AE 0.241 0.242 0.242 37.1 38.2 37.65 Bimodal AE[17] 0.250 0.297 0.274 30.2 35.4 32.8 Bimodal DBN[17, 24] 0.173 0.203 0.188 25.3 27 26.15 Corr-AE 0.319 0.375 0.347 47.1 53.5 50.3 Corr-Cross-AE 0.349 0.348 0.349 53.1 59.7 56.4 Corr-Full-AE 0.331 0.379 0.355 49.6 56.5 53.05

images and searching images by texts on Wikipedia data set, improves 16.0% and 3.3% respectively on the two tasks on Pascal data set, improves 27.6% and 26.3% respectively on the two tasks on NUS-WIDE-10k data set. Both Bimodal AE and Bimodal DBN model the multi-modal inputs with a shared hidden layer. Representation learned in shared hid- den layer should cover diﬀerence between two modalities for achieving good performance in both autoencoders or RBM- s. It therefore focuses more on learning complementarity instead of correlation across data from diﬀerent modalities. Figure 7 shows three examples of text-based cross-modal using our Corr-Full-AE and the best baseline method. In these examples, the top four retrieved images by Corr-Full- AE are all relevant to correspondence text query. Figure 8 shows several failure cases of Corr-Full-AE on the NUS- WIDE-10k test data set. As for the top 20% percentage metric, our three correspon- dence autoencoders also signiﬁcantly outperform the other baseline models. There is only one ground-truth for each image-text pair under this evaluation metric. Figure 9 shows several top-1-hit retrieval examples by our Corr-Full-AE. In

these cases, the ﬁrst returned results by the query are al- l ground truth on both image query text and text query image tasks.

3.6 Analysis of α Here, mAP values of three correspondence autoencoders with diﬀerent values of α in all data sets are given in Fig- ure 10. Both too small values and too large values of α show poor performance in the three data sets. This is consisten- t with the impact of α in the present models. Too small values of α overemphasize the “individuality” of data and ignore the correlations. Too large values overemphasize the correlations and ignore the “individuality” of the data. To validate the hypothesis of the eﬀect of α to the“individ- uality” of data, we use tSNE [26] to visualize the image and text representation learned by our Corr-Full-AE. As shown in Figure 11, when α = 0.01, image and text representa- tion space are almost disjoint. In this case, image and text have strong “individuality” so that the learned representa- tion of image and text have no correlations. To the other extreme of the α, when α = 0.99, “individuality” of im-

water street reflections windows men wedding glasses york post ties

person window window window sky animal

blue red travel face america sculpture chile memorial tourist

sky window water window clouds person

Text Query Top five retrieved images

(a) Failure cases: text query image

water grass grass window grass grass

warter flowers flowers flowers flowers flowers

green trees shade green grass shoes field washington rain united green coast path

photography grass garden eos home golf

macro flower flowers pink closeup rain excellence rose flora turkey blooms

nature blue flowers fab fruit blossoms blooms

nature bravo flower pink excellence blooms

bravo color colors summer excellence rainbow petals

flower pink washington excellence blossoms

Image query Top five retrieved texts

(b) Failure cases: image query text

Figure 8: Several failure cases of Corr-Full-AE on the NUS-WIDE-10k test data set. The words under the texts/images are the correspondence semantic labels. In the cases of text query images, the images are related to the subset of the text query. For example, in the ﬁrst case, the ﬁrst retrieved image is related to the “windows” and “glasses”. In the cases of image query texts, the image queries are too diﬃcult to be recognized. For example, in the second case, the image query is easy to be recognized as the ﬂowers falsely.

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 ®

Corr_AEs Cross_Corr_AEs Full_Corr_AEs Best baseline

(a) Wikipedia

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 ®

Corr_AEs Cross_Corr_AEs Full_Corr_AEs Best baseline

(b) Pascal

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 ®

Corr_AEs Cross_Corr_AEs Full_Corr_AEs Best baseline

(c) NUS-WIDE-10k

Figure 10: mAP values of three correspondence autoencoders with diﬀerent values of α in all data sets. The X-axis gives values for α. The Y-axis gives the mAP scores. The yellow line denotes the mAP score of the best baseline model, which does not change with α.

(a) α = 0.01 (b) α = 0.8 (c) α = 0.99

Figure 11: Image and text representation visualization of diﬀerent value for α on the NUS-WIDE-10k test data set. Diﬀerent shapes denote diﬀerent modalities: “square” for image, “plus” for text. Diﬀerent colors denote diﬀerent semantic categories.

age and text representation is missing due to the confusion representation space. In this case, any image-text pair has correlations, regardless of whether the image and text inputs match or not.When α is set to 0.8, the representation space is quite eﬀective to the cross-modal retrieval task, since a large number of image-text pairs with same semantic labels are clustered. As shown in Figure 10, the yellow line denotes the mAP scores of the best baseline model. On all data sets, our three correspondence autoencoders outperform the best baseline when α is in a quite large range.

4. CONCLUSION In this work, a cross-modal learning model, Corr-AE, is presented. This model incorporates representation learn- ing and correlation learning into a single process, so com- bining autoencoder cost with correlation cost. Corr-AE is here extended to Corr-Cross-AE by replacing the basic au- toencoder with a cross-modal autoencoder. Finally, Corr- Full-AE is built by combining Corr-AE and Corr-Cross-AE. These three models are compared to CCA-based and multi- modal deep learning models and found to be eﬀective in

cross-modal retrieval of information from three publicly avail- able data sets.

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China(No. 61273365), National High Technology Research and Development Program of China(No. 2012AA011103), discipline building plan in 111 base(No. B08004), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 2013RC0304) and Engineering Research Center of Information Networks, Ministry of Education.

6. REFERENCES

[1] M. Bastan, H. Cam, U. G´l´zd´l´zkbay, and z. Ulusoy. Bilvideo-7: an mpeg-7- compatible video indexing and retrieval system. IEEE MultiMedia, 17(3):62–73, 2010. [2] Y. Bengio. Learning deep architectures for AI. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 2(1):1–127, 2009. [3] E. L. Bird, Steven and E. Klein. In Natural Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly Media Inc., 2009. [4] D. M. Blei and M. I. Jordan. Modeling annotated data. ACM SIGIR, pages 127–134, 2003. [5] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. JMLR, 3:993–1022, 2003. [6] A. Bosch, A. Zisserman, and X. Mu˜noz. Image classiﬁcation using random forests and ferns. In ICCV, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2007. [7] T.-S. Chua, J. Tang, R. Hong, H. Li, Z. Luo, and Y.-T. Zheng. Nus-wide: A real-world web image database from national university of singapore. In CIVR, Santorini, Greece., 2009. [8] A. Farhadi, S. M. M. Hejrati, M. A. Sadeghi, P. Young, C. Rashtchian, J. Hockenmaier, and D. A. Forsyth. Every picture tells a story: Generating sentences from images. In K. Daniilidis, P. Maragos, and N. Paragios, editors, ECCV (4), volume 6314 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 15–29. Springer, 2010. [9] A. Frome, G. Corrado, J. Shlens, S. Bengio, J. Dean, M. Ranzato, and T. Mikolov. Devise: A deep visual-semantic embedding model. In NIPS, pages 2121–2129, 2013. [10] D. R. Hardoon, S. Szedm´l´ck, and J. Shawe-Taylor. Canonical correlation analysis; an overview with application to learning methods. Neural Computation, 16:2639–2664, 2004. [11] G. Hinton and R. Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science, 313(5786):504–507, 2006. [12] G. E. Hinton. Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence. Neural Computation, 14(8):1771–1800, 2002. [13] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y. Teh. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural Computation, 18(7):1527–1554, 2006. [14] Y. Jia, M. Salzmann, and T. Darrell. Learning cross-modality similarity for multinomial data. ICCV, pages 2407–2414, 2011.

[15] J. Kim, J. Nam, and I. Gurevych. Learning semantics with deep belief network for cross-language information retrieval. COLING, pages 579–588, 2012. [16] B. S. Manjunath, J. R. Ohm, V. V. Vinod, , and A. Yamada. Color and texture descriptors. IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, Special Issue on MPEG-7, 11(6):703–715, June 2001. [17] J. Ngiam, A. Khosla, M. Kim, J. Nam, H. Lee, and A. Y. Ng. Multimodal deep learning. ICML, pages 689–696, 2011. [18] A. Oliva and A. Torralba. Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope. IJCV, 42(3):145–175, 2001. [19] N. Rasiwasia, J. C. Pereira, E. Coviello, G. Doyle, G. R. G. Lanckriet, R. Levy, and N. Vasconcelos. A new approach to cross-modal multimedia retrieval. ACM MM, pages 251–260, 2010. [20] R. Salakhutdinov and G. Hinton. Replicated softmax: an undirected topic model. NIPS, pages 1607–1614, 2009. [21] R. R. Salakhutdinov and G. G. Hinton. An eﬃcient learning procedure for deep Boltzmann machines. Neural computation, 24(8):1967–2006, 2012. [22] P. Smolensky. Parallel distributed processing: explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 1. chapter Information processing in dynamical systems: foundations of harmony theory, pages 194–281. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1986. [23] R. Socher, M. Ganjoo, C. D. Manning, and A. Ng. Zero-shot learning through cross-modal transfer. In NIPS, pages 935–943, 2013. [24] N. Srivastava and R. Salakhutdinov. Learning representations for multimodal data with deep belief nets. ICML Representation Learning Workshop, 2012. [25] N. Srivastava and R. Salakhutdinov. Multimodal learning with deep Boltzmann machines. NIPS, pages 2231–2239, 2012. [26] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton. Visualizing high-dimensional data using t-sne. JMLR, 2008. [27] A. Vedaldi and B. Fulkerson. Vlfeat: an open and portable library of computer vision algorithms. In A. D. Bimbo, S.-F. Chang, and A. W. M. Smeulders, editors, ACM MM, pages 1469–1472, 2010. [28] M. Welling, M. Rosen-Zvi, and G. Hinton. Exponential family harmoniums with an application to information retrieval. In NIPS, pages 501–508, Vancouver, 2004. Morgan Kaufmann. [29] J. Weston, S. Bengio, and N. Usunier. Large scale image annotation: Learning to rank with joint word-image embeddings. In ECML, pages 21–35, 2010. [30] Y. Zhuang, Y. F. Wang, F. Wu, Y. Zhang, and W. Lu. Supervised coupled dictionary learning with group structures for multi-modal retrieval. In AAAI, 2013.

Norwich City F.C. was formed following a meeting at the Criterion Cafe in Norwich on 17 June 1902 by a group of friends led by two former Norwich CEYMS players, Norwich City FC and played their first competitive match against Harwich & Parkeston, at Newmarket Road on 6 September 1902. Originally, the club was nicknamed the ''Citizens'', and played in light blue and white halved shirts. The popular pastime of canary rearing had given rise to the team's nickname of "The Canaries" by April 1905, and by February 1907 this moniker had been adopted by the national press. ĂĂ

(a) Wikipedia

A Das Air Cargo plane sits on the runway. A large airplane that is parked. A passenger plane parked on a runway. A white airplane with the words Das Air Cargo is on a runway. Plane on the ground on a runway.

(b) Pascal

nature blue green landscape spring leaves lines country hills

(c) NUS-WIDE-10k

Figure 7: Three examples of text-based cross-modal using our Corr-Full-AE and best baseline method. In each example, the query text and its correspon- dence image are shown on the top; retrieved images of our Corr-Full-AE are presented in the middle; retrieved images of the best baseline model are pre- sented at the bottom. Relevant matches are shown with green bounding box. Irrelevant matches are shown with red bounding box. The text queries come from sport, aeroplane and grass category re- spectively.

War broke out again when Armenia and Iberia revolted against Sassanid rule in 571 AD, following clashes involving Roman and Persian proxies in Yemen and the Syrian desert, and Roman negotiations for an alliance with the Turks against Persia.John of Epiphania, ''History'', , gives an additional for the outbreak of the war: " contentiousness increased even further when Justin did not deem to pay the Medians the five hundred pounds of gold each year previously agreed to under the peace treaties and let the Roman State remain forever a tributary of the Persians."ĂĂ

It is a commercially important species to the extent that its fins are prized for soup and its meat and oil frequently used. It is used fresh, smoked, dried and salted for human consumption and its hide is used for leather. It is subject to fishing pressure throughout virtually its whole range &mdash; although it is more often taken as by-catch than by design, since it takes bait from longlines intended for other species. Famed oceanographic researcher Jacques Cousteau described the oceanic whitetip as "the most dangerous of all sharks". ĂĂ

Andean Peru has been recognized as one of six global areas that saw the indigenous development of civilization, and one of two, along with Mesoamerica, in the Western Hemisphere. Norte Chico has pushed back the horizon for complex societies in the Peruvian region by centuries. The Chavín culture, circa 900 BC, had long been considered the first civilization of the area and is still regularly cited as such in general works. ĂĂ

(a) Wikipedia

A black and white cow in a grassy field stares at the camera. A black and white cow standing in a grassy field. A black and white cow stands on grass against a partly cloudy blue sky. A cow is gazing over the grass he is about to graze. Black and white cow standing in grassy field.

Two bicyclists and a pedestrian are waiting to cross the road. Two bicyclists wait to cross a busy road. Two blonde girls attempt to cross a busy street in town with their bicycles. Two women watching the street with their bikes to see when they may cross. Two women with bicycles are trying to cross the street.

A group of friends pose with furry hats. A group of people, four of which are women, two of which are men, pose wearing fuzzy hats with earflaps. A group of peoples posing in fur hats. Group of teenagers being silly. Visitors pose wearing fur hats.

(b) Pascal

nature green quality fly spider

white macro flowers pink rxcellence balcony

food fish mexico

(c) NUS-WIDE-10k

Figure 9: Several image-text pairs of three data set- s. In these pairs, the closest images(texts) to the text(image) queries are all ground truth. In ﬁgure (a), three image-text pairs come from warfare, bi- ology, history category respectively. In ﬁgure (b), three pairs come from bicycle, cow, person category respectively. In ﬁgure (c), three pairs come from animal, ﬂower, food category respectively. Various images(texts) can be retrieved eﬀectively.