Designing a Japanese Idiom Education Support System

for Overseas’ Students

KONISHI Yusuke 㵴㪁, Ruifan LI㪁, Fuji REN 㵵㪁

㵴Graduate School of Advanced Technology and Science, The University of Tokushima Minami Josanjima, Tokushima, 7708506, Japan 㵵Institute of Technology and Science, The University of Tokushima Minami Josanjima, Tokushima, 7708506, Japan 㪁㩷School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China E-MAIL:sir_g98@hotmail.com, ruifan.li@gmail.com, ren@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Abstract

The Japanese idioms are phrases which two or more words combine and have the different meaning from the original word. Therefore, learning a Japanese idiom is dif- ficult for Japanese language learners. We are developing a Japanese Idiom Education Support System for Overseas’ Students to solve this problem. The main purposes of the system are to raise learner's interest of learning idiom, and to teach the right usage of an idiom. The main functions of this sys- tem are the function of Japanese idiom re- trieval and teaching Japanese idiom. The learner can input the idiom into the system and the system can retrieve and display an explanation of the idiom. And the learner can input the situation into the system and the system can retrieve the idiom. In this paper, the outline of Japanese Idiom Education Support System for Over- sea’s Students, the method of Japanese idiom retrieval, and the result of question- naire is presented. A questionnaire did the survey on attitudes toward educational support system.

1 Introduction

Now days, borderless society, borderless econ- omy, and borderless circumstances are progressing on a world-wide scale. The cultural exchanges be- tween each country also prospered. Therefore, the international students who come to Japan continue

to increase. From the statistics data of the number of international students, the number of interna- tional students who come to Japan increased twice compared to ten years before [1]. The spread of Japanese language education abroad increased also. By 2006, Japanese language learners were 2,980,000 people in 133 nations and areas. This data does not include self learning and using a pri- vate tutor. However, since Japanese language learners increased quickly, Japanese language schools are facing a shortage of teachers [2][3]. Also there is another problem of Japanese lan- guage learning. Gradually, because of its emphasis on knowledge packing and memorizing, learners have less chances to think by themselves, and learners have less chances to understand Japanese culture; and manners and customs. Therefore, the expectation for the educational support system base on computer is also increased [4][5]. Al- though the present educational support system is useful for language learning, but various problems still are existing. We point out the main problems as follows. Because question sentences are prepared, there is no enough flexible communication with learners. Because learners answer the questions from the multiple choices, they do not take a leading part in answering process. Besides, when the answers giv- en by the learner is wrong, to show the correct an- swers dynamically on the simple display is diffi- cult. Understanding about Japanese culture; and manners and customs is difficult from the educa- tional support system. To solve the problems men- tioned above, we are still researching and develop- ing this system.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2 The outline ofJapanese Idiom

Japanese idiom is a phrase of two or more words combine and have different meaning from the original word. For more explanation see an example shown below. "㥦䈏㜞䈇(a nose is high)” 1. It means "the nose of a body part being higher than someone", if this phrase is interpreted as the original meaning. 2. When using as an idiom, it means "proudly" or "beam with pride". Example: ำ䈏มᴺ⹜㛎䈮วᩰ䈚䇮䈍ῳ᭽䉅䈘䈡䈎䈚㩹㥦䈏㜞䈇㩹䈖䈫䈪䈚䉊䈉䇯㩷 1. Interpretation from the original meaning of the word: Your having passed the national bar exam. Probably, your father's nose will be high. 2. Interpretation from the idiom: Your having passed the national bar exam. Your father must be "beaming with pride" at your passing In the case 1, the meaning of a phrase can be interpreted as "nose is high" from the meaning of each word. However, in the case 2, the meaning of a phrase cannot be interpreted from the meaning of each word. The meaning of the example number 2 is the following way of thinking. When someone boasts of something, or while someone is talking exultantly, his face turns upward. At this time, the position of a nose becomes a little high. Expressing that situation, a phrase meaning becomes the meaning of example number 2. The meaning of example number 2 is a similar, such phrases are Japanese idioms. There are the following Japanese idioms other than "㥦߇㜞޿(a nose is high)".

Idiom: Ἣ䈱ゞ(Car of fire) Meaning: "financial difficulties" , "be strapped for cash".

Idiom: ᱞ჻䈮ੑ⸒䈲䈭䈇 (A samurai does not have duplicity) Meaning: I surely keep promise. My word is my bond.

Japanese language has many idioms. There are many various expressions using the body parts, nature, animals, plants, etc. These are often used in Japanese daily conversation. If a learner can use idiom, detailed explanation will become unnecessary at the time of conversation. Detail explanation in conversation becomes unnecessary if learner can use idiom. Furthermore, the contents of the conservation the learner can use the idioms to express their feelings correctly. English language also has idioms. Some English and Japanese idioms use the same expression. However, the meanings are different. For example:"pull someone's leg". In English means "teasing, caper". In Japanese means "drag down, stand in the way". A learner can talk with Japanese people smoothly; if he or she can use Japanese idioms.

3 System configuration

This section explains the outline of Designing a Japanese Idiom Education Support System for Overseas Student. Figure 1 shows the system con- figuration. This system is composed by each mod- ule, knowledge base, and database (DB). There are two types of user input sentence and system output in "learner" part shown in Figure 1. They are "For retrieving idiom" and "For learning idiom". The details of the input sentence are as following.

For retrieving idiom

9 The search word for retrieving idiom. (idiom, situation, a word ,etc.) 9 A conversation sentence with MS Agent. 9 Each operation.

For learning idiom

9 History management of a learner. 9 The answer of an exercise problem. 9 A conversation sentence with MS Agent. 9 Each operation.

The details of the output sentence are as following. For retrieving idiom

9 Explanation of an idiom. 9 Search assistance for retrieving an idiom. 9 MS Agent's response.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. System configuration

For learning idiom

9 Teaching idiom. 9 Exercise problems. 9 Results. 9 Learner’s history. 9 MS Agent's response.

This system has basically three functions. They are the function to retrieve an idiom, the function to teach an idiom, and MS Agent. The MS Agent helps learner’s operation. Retrieving an idiom has two ways: The first is by inputting an idiom directly; a learner can also search an idiom by a part of idiom and some words. The second way is reverse resolution of an idiom, a learner inputs a situation then the system searches the suitable idiom. The input sentence is analyzed automatically using Super Function from the field of machine translation. The system displays the meaning, example, similar idiom, situation, and example of use as search results. Moreover, the example of use is shown using the dialogue of MS Agents. The function to teach idiom explains an idiom using animation, and have an exam. Progress of learning and result of exam are managed as history information. The learning history is displayed by

graph. An exercise problem is automatically gen- erated using the frame of the prepared text. More- over, we generate the example of an idiom, and the response of MS Agent using this way. This system always displays MS Agent and gives explanation of the operation to a learner. MS Agent has easy conversation using an idiom with a learner.

4 Idiom retrieval function

Retrieval of an idiom processes by “Idiom re- trieval module” and “Idiom reverse resolution module” as it shown in Figure 1. The outline of Idiom retrieval is as follows. It has two methods. When learner inputs the idiom, the system displays the explanations. When the learner inputs the situation, the system displays the idiom corresponding to the input situa- tion. The example of implementation of Idiom re- trieval is shown in the Figure 2. The learner is searching the idiom. The system is presenting an explanation of the idiom which a learner wants to know. And the example of use of the idiom by MS Agent is shown. A learner inputs an idiom in the user input form shown on the right of the Figure 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 3. Process of Idiom retrieval module

Figure 2. The example of implementation of Idiom retrieval

The system displays a list of an idiom including the word under input. A learner can choose an idiom from a list, and see an explanation of the idiom. Retrieving an idiom uses ambiguous re- trieval. The form on the left of the Figure 2 is the explanation of idiom. Two MS Agents explain the example of use of an idiom in the dialogue of MS Agents. Another MS Agent supports the operation of learner and a simple dialogue with a user.

4.1 Retrieving a meaning of idiom

Here, retrieval of the idiom by a learner is ex- plained. A learner can search an idiom using the following ways. 1. Input an idiom directly. 2. Input the word contained in an idiom. 3. The system displays a list of idiom which in- cludes the character under input when a learn- er inputs the idiom. A learner chooses an idiom from the list. The process of Idiom retrieval is shown in Fig. 3. A system always checks IME. This is for display- ing a list of the idiom which includes the character under input. If a learner chooses an idiom from the list, the system displays explanation of the idiom. Or if a learner clicks a search button, the system performs ambiguous retrieval. This is for prevent- ing the problem which happened when a learner input the mis-spell of the idiom because the system cannot search the correct idiom, etc. If there is an

idiom match fully with the inputted idiom then the system displays explanation of the idiom. If there is no idiom match fully with the inputted idiom then the system displays a list of the idiom below ambiguity 4. Simple retrieval is performed if there are no search results of ambiguous retrieval. Sim- ple retrieval retrieves an idiom including an input word, and a system displays a list of the search results. If a learner chooses an idiom from this list then the explanation of the idiom is displayed. The reason for using these ways are as follows. 9 For preventing the problem which a learner cannot search with an input mistake. 9 For getting a learner interest in other idioms by displaying a list. 9 For retrieval for dimly remembered idioms.

4.2 Retrieving an idiom by a situation

Here is explanation of Idiom reverse resolution module. A learner inputs a situation. The system searches a suitable idiom in the situation. The input sentence is analyzed automatically using Super Function from the field of machine translation.[6] Super Function is concerned with the relation of the original language sentence and the target lan- guage sentence. There are two basic structures in Super Function. One is a direction graph, and the other is a transformation table. It is possible to make sentences relating to the direction graph of Super Function in the direction graph, and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 4. Process of Searching idiom from a situation

Table1. Node table and Edge table

Figure 5. Direction graph

transformation table analyzes the input statement. In this research, the source language is the sen- tences input by learners. The target language is the source language to which information is added such as idiom, phrase, number of nodes, and variables. The outline of process of the input sentence analysis by Super Function is shown below. And the process flow is in the Figure 4. 1. The entered sentence is analyzed morphologi- cally. 2. Preprocessing of compound word, and Re- move a filler, punctuation mark, particles oth- er than negative form. 3. Classify a word by meaning. Word such as "father" and "mother" are classified into "fam- ily". 4. Classify by Super Function. 5. Retrieve Super Function of the same node ta- ble in Super Function DB. 6. Idioms are taken out from the edge table of Super Function Database. The input sentence is analyzed in the above- mentioned process.

For example: ᧪᦬ߪ೽෼౉߇౉ࠆߣᕁ߁߆ࠄޔᣏⴕࠍߒ߹ߔޕ (I guess I will probably get extra money next month. So I will go to travel.). The processing step1:

Analyzes morphologically the input sentence us- ing chasen[7]. The processing step 2:

Remove a filler, punctuation mark, particles other than negative form. The input sentence is changed into ᧪᦬/೽෼౉/౉ࠆ/ᕁ߁/ᣏⴕ/ߔࠆ. The processing step 3:

Classify a word by meaning. A noun is classi- fied according to a meaning. A verb is classified according to +, -, and 0. It is classified according to this example as follows. ᧪᦬(next month) Ј future ೽෼౉(extra money) Ј money ౉ࠆ(get)  Ј 㧗 ᕁ߁(I think)  Ј 0 ᣏⴕ(travel) Ј enjoy ߔࠆ(do) Ј 㧗 The processing step 4:

In this research, the sentence structure made from the classification of Step 3 is Super Function. Figure 5 shows the direction graph. Table 1 is node table and edge table of Figure 5. The processing step 5:

Retrieve the same Super Function in the Super Function DB according to the generated node table. Process moves to the processing step 5 if agreed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 5. The an example of implementation which teaches the idiom using animation

Figure 6. The exercise problem form

The processing step 6:

An idiom corresponding to Super Function is taken out from the edge table of Super Function Database. The system displays a list of an idiom.

The system can use the edge table and node ta- ble of Super Function Database when generating an exercise problem sentence. Input sentence anal- ysis and exercise problem generation can be easily performed by one database and methodology. In this research, Super Function is used for such a reason. Moreover, when classifying into a Super Function at Step 4, a word is also registered into an edge table as shown in the Table 1. And the node table and edge table which were created from the user input sentence are saved. Because we collect learner’s input sentences and then we can analyze a learner's input sentence. Furthermore, we can register these into Super Function Database and we can extend the super function DB. This can be used for a future system improvement. However, there is some problem in the method using Super Function. The problems of the input sentence analysis which used Super Function are as follows: The system cannot respond to the input sentence of Super Function which does not exist in Super Function Database. And the combination of a node and the combination of a node and edge increase by the long text. Consequently, the num- ber of Super Function also increases. Super Func- tion Database needs enough number of Super Function for the input sentence analysis. The sys-

tem cannot respond to a long sentence now. In or- der to solve these problems, we need the improve- ment of the methodology of Super Function. Or we need to add the methodology which is different in the methodology of Super Function.

5 Teaching idiom function

The teaching idiom function is explained here. The function to teach an idiom processes by "Edu- cation guidance module", "Animation management module", "Exercise problems module", and "Record management module" as you can see from the Figure 1. This function has the following me- thods. 9 To explain a Japanese idiom 9 The exercise problem of an Japanese idiom 9 Generation of a exercise problem 9 User management

5.1 To explain a Japanese idiom

The function to teach idiom explains an idiom using animation. Animation is needed in order to give a learner interest. The result of a questionnaire survey shows this necessity. A questionnaire result is shown by Chapter 6. Figure 5 is an example of implementation which teaches the idiom using animation. The system explains a Japanese idiom using TVML [8]. TVML Player is used for the dis- play of animation. TVML is a text-based language that can describe all the necessary elements for TV program productions. TVML Player is the software that can interpret the script written in TVML and generate a TV program in real time. It is easy to create animation using this software. TVML can also simplify modification of anima- tion.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5.2 The exercise problem of an Japanese idiom

The methods of answering the problems in Jap- anese exercise are as follow: 1. Select the right answer from the given choices 2. A part of sentence is blank. The learner can select the right word to fill a blank. 3. Connect a line which divide a sentence, and make the right sentence. 4. Learner inputs an answer. A system adjusts the difficulty of an exercise prob- lem to a learner’s level. The system manages a re- sult of exercise problem as history information. A system creates these exercise problem sentences automatically. The creation of the exercise prob- lem uses Idiom DB and the Super Function DB. A part of exercise problem is shown in the Figure 6. The Figure 6 is the exercise problem form of part 2 and 3 above.

6 The development of the questionnaire system

We have conducted a survey on attitudes toward educational support system. The part of question- naire results and considerations are shown here below:

Purpose of survey:

In order to develop the system, we need to get to know a request from learners. Moreover, we also need to get to know the comments toward an edu- cational support system. It is very important to send out questionnaires, and to get to know the opinions from the Japanese language learners.

The Questionnaire way: Object: The first year students and second year students of Japanese language department, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications in China. The students are studying Japanese for one to two years. The number of students: 44 The number of samples: 42 There is two “no comment”.

The results of questionnaire:

1. Do you need Japanese language educational support system?

In the questionnaire result of this question, eigh- ty-one percent answered "Necessary" or "A little necessary ". The answer of "Unnecessary" was 0. Therefore, developing the Japanese language edu- cational support system is needed.

Answers 㩷No. of Learners Percentage

Necessary 18 43%

A little necessary 16 38%

Not applicable 8 19%

A little unnecessary 0 0%

Unnecessary 0 0%

Total of number 42 100%

2. What do you think about educational support systems? Only thirty-six percent thought that educational support system is interesting. As a reason which is not interesting, there were many opinions "The contents are simple" and "The system does not use animations and music". The system needs to use many animations and musics. Otherwise, a system cannot raise learner's interest of learning.

Answers 㩷No. of Learners Percentage

Not interesting 5 12%

A little uninteresting 9 21%

Not applicable 13 31%

A little interesting 12 29%

Interesting 3 7%

Total of number 42 100%

3. What do you often use, when learning Japa- nese? Eighty-two percent use the dictionary and the electronic dictionary for learning Japanese. The system needs to have the function which is like the dictionary. The learners can continue using the sys- tem and searching Japanese words which want to know.

Answers No. of Learners Percentage

Dictionary 22 58%

Electronic dictionary 9 24%

Personal computer 2 5%

Reference book 5 13%

Others 0 0%

Total of number 38 100%

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4. What kind of teaching methods do you want? The students can choose three answers from the given choices in this question. Thirty-five percent of answers are "Using the Animations" and "Using the Japanese Movies for teaching". The animation is indispensable to a sys- tem. Twenty-four percent of answers are "Using Japanese Cultures and Histories" and "There are so many knowledge about Japan". From these results, the system needs to teach an idiom using animation and much knowledge about Japan.

From these results of questionnaire, we got to know the students hope the interesting educational support system. Especially, the system has to use the animations for teaching. Moreover, the system needs to have the function of a dictionary. It be- comes the system convenient for a learner.

7 Conclusions

In this paper, we described about Designing a Japanese Idiom Education Support System. We referred to learner input sentence analysis using Super Function, and the method of retrieving the idioms. At the present stage the effectiveness of Super Function in this system has not yet verified enough. In order to verify the validity of a system, we need to expand the Super Function Database and we need to expand the contents of animation which use for teaching idioms. Therefore, future work is to research the method of automatic gener- ation of a database and the method of automatic generation of animation contents. And we referred

to the learner’s request from the results of ques- tionnaire. We got to know the system needs anima- tion and a dictionary function from the results of questionnaire. The system has the animation using TVML. In order to display the explanation in another language in the future, we need to create the bilingual dictionary.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China under grant No. 60873001, 2007BAH05B02-04, and 2007BAH05B02-04.

References

[1] Statistics of Japan: Statistics of Japan which sees in graph, Statistics Bureau and the Director-General for Policy Planning: http://www.stat.go.jp/data/nihon/pdf/ngraph.pdf [2] Murano Ryoko, Japanese Language Volunteers in Thai Secondary Schools, The Research Center for Japanese Language Education annual bulletin 9, pp.1-8 2000 [3] The Japan Foundation, 2006 Survey of Overseas Organ- izations Involved in Japanese-Language Education, the Japan Foundation, 2006 [4] Koji Ishida, Development of the science e-learning teaching materials which utilized student knowlege, Modern educational needs measure support program in the Heisei 16 fiscal year [5] Koichi SAITO and Satoshi TAKAHASHI, A Prelimi- nary Study on Modeling for Making Concerning Cause Belonging of "Losing Interest in Science"- Based on the Consideration Investigation of the High School Student -, Journal of Tokyo University of Information Sciences Vol.9 No.1, pp.1-9.2005 [6] Fuji Ren, Super-function based machine translation, Communications of COLIPS, pp.83-100,1999 [7] Yuji Matsumoto, Japanese Morphological Analysis Sys- tem Chasen, Information Processing Society of Japan [8] TVML,NHK Science and Technical Research Laborato- ries:http://www.nhk.or.jp/strl/tvml/english/player2/index .html [9] Makoto Suzuki, Yukiko Nozaki, How is elementary science education advanced in many foreign countries? Chemistry & education , Vol.56, No.12, Page.638-641, 2008. [10] Tadashi ANDO, The Advantages and Problems in e- Learning, -in the Case of Phonetic Education by Using ALC Net Academy-, Nagoya University of Arts and Sciences, the journal of liberal arts, 2005.Feb [11] An Open-Source Large Vocabulary CSR Engine Julius: http://julius.sourceforge.jp/en_index.php [12] Fine Speech: http://www.animo.co.jp/index.jsp [13] Chengjiu Yin, Hiroaki Ogata and Yoneo Yano : Partici- patory Simulation for Collaborative Learning Expe- riences, Information Science Publishing, New York, USA, Oct. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 08:32:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.